.TH HORACE-CAPTURE 1 "2019-12-14" "LibHolmes" "LibHolmes-HORACE Manual"
.SH NAME
horace-capture \- record new HORACE session
.SH SYNOPSIS
horace capture [<options>] <source> ... <destination>
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I horace capture
command is responsible for monitoring a host or network, capturing any
resulting event data, and recording it in the form of a new HORACE session.
.PP
The source and destination arguments are endpoint names which determine,
respectively, what is to be monitored and where the resulting session data
should be sent.
.PP
Writing directly to a remote endpoint is not forbidden, but increases the
risk of data loss if the method of capture is time-sensitive. The
recommended mode of operation is to capture to local spoolfiles in the
first instance, as these provide both high throughput and high
availability. For example:
.PP
.RS 4
horace-capture netif:ens3 horace+file:/var/spool/horace
.RE
.PP
would capture network traffic from the interface named
.I ens3
and write the resulting session data to a set of spoolfiles placed within
a subdirectory of /var/spool/horace.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -h
Display help text then exit.
.IP -S
Set source identifier.
.IP -T
Select time system.
.IP -x
Exclude address or netblock.
.IP -D
Hash messages with a given digest function.
.IP -k
Sign messages using key in a given file.
.IP -R
Set delay in milliseconds before signing.
.IP -v
Increase verbosity of log messages.
.SH TIME SYSTEMS
Three time systems are currently supported:
.IP posix
An approximation to UTC which disregards leap seconds
.IP utc
Universal Coordinated Time
.IP tai-10
International Atomic Time minus 10 seconds
.PP
These time systems are usable only if the system clock behaves
appropriately. In particular:
.IP *
posix and utc interpret the system clock as UTC using the mapping
defined by the POSIX specification.
.IP *
utc additionally requires that the system clock receive and act upon leap
second notifications (as opposed to leap seconds being smeared).
.IP *
tai-10 interprets the system clock as a number of TAI seconds since the
POSIX epoch of 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC.
.PP
Some limited sanity checking is performed based on the time zone
configuration, however it is for the user to ensure that the
requested time system is compatible with the behaviour of the
system clock.
.PP
If a time system is not specified then either posix or tai-10 will be
selected depending on the timezone configuration (posix or right).
.PP
Support for the utc time system is currently experimental.
.SH HASHING
HORACE event records can be hashed at the point of collection, with the
result being incorporated into the following event record. This causes
the records to form a chain, such that if the integrity of one record can
be validated then that allows all preceding records to be validated also.
.PP
This capability can be used in two ways:
.IP *
By itself, to protect against accidental modification only.
.IP *
In conjunction with digital signatures, to protect against both accidental
and malicious modification, but without the need to sign every message
(see below).
.PP
The hash function is configurable using the -D option, with the following
supported currently:
.IP sha256
The SHA-256 hash algorithm as defined by FIPS PUB 180-2
.IP sha512
The SHA-512 hash algorithm as defined by FIPS PUB 180-2
.SH DIGITAL SIGNATURES
HORACE event records can be digitally signed at the point of collection in
order to protect against accidental or malicious alteration, and thereby
provide evidence of their authenticity.
.PP
To do this it is first necessary to generate a secret key for use during
the signing process and a corresponding public key for subsequent
verification of the signatures. These are stored together in a keyfile,
specified using the -k option, which additionally identifies the chosen
signature algorithm.
.PP
Currently there is only one supported signature algorithm, that being
ed25519. A suitable keyfile can be created using the
.I horace-genkey
command.
.PP
Signing is a computationally expensive process which has the potential to
become unacceptably burdensome if every record is signed. However, when
signatures are used in conjunction with a chain of record hashes as
described above, not every record need be signed.
.PP
The -R option allows for signature production to be rate-limited. It
introduces a delay, of a given number of milliseconds, between the
time when an event record becomes available for signing and the time
when one is signed. A longer interval reduces the number of signatures
produced, but increases the number of records which could be left
unsigned if the monitoring process were to terminate abruptly.
.PP
(Note that the event record which is signed may differ from the one which
triggered the time delay, since it is always the most recent available
record which is signed.)
.SH SEE ALSO
horace(1), horace-genkey(1)
.SH BUGS
In development, not yet stable.
.PP
Rate limiting of signatures does not function as intended if there are long
gaps between events.
.PP
The capture process currently involves some unnecessary copying.
.SH AUTHOR
Graham Shaw (gdshaw@riscpkg.org)
