.TH HORACE 1 "2019-12-14" "LibHolmes" "LibHolmes-HORACE Manual"
.SH NAME
horace \- reliable monitoring of hosts and networks
.SH SYNOPSIS
horace [<options>] <subcommand> [<args>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is an implementation of HORACE, the Host Observation, Recording And
Continuous Exfiltration protocol. Its purpose is to monitor a host or
network in one location, and reliably forward the resulting data to
another location for analysis.
.PP
The
.I horace
command does not implement any of this functionality itself, but
instead acts as a front-end to a set of subcommands for performing specific
actions. Each subcommand has a separate manpage containing detailed
instructions.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -h
Display help text then exit
.IP -V
Display version number then exit
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.IP capture
Capture events from an endpoint to produce a session
.IP forward
Forward sessions from one endpoint to another
.IP genkey
Generate keypair for signing
.SH ENDPOINTS
An endpoint is something that HORACE data can be received from or sent to.
Each endpoint has a name, which conforms to the same syntax as an absolute
URI. Each endpoint name consequently begins with a scheme name followed by
a colon, and the scheme name determines how the remainder of the endpoint
name should be interpreted.
.PP
Note that endpoints may differ in the capabilities they provide, and for
this reason they are not necessarily interchangable with each other.
Potential capabilities include event capture, reading dessions from a
source and writing sessions to a destination.
.PP
This implementation includes endpoint drivers for the following schemes:
.IP netif
Event capture from a network interface
.IP unix
Event capture from a UNIX-domain datagram socket
.IP horace+file
Reading or writing sessions to the local filesystem
.IP horace+tcp
Transmission or reception of sessions via a TCP connection
.IP mongodb
Storage of sessions in a MongoDB database
.IP syslog+udp
Recording of log messages using the Syslog protocol via UDP
.IP clock
Monitoring the status of the system clock
.PP
For any of the above, if query component is present then it contains a
set of named parameters in x-www-form-urlencoded format.
.PP
For
.I netif
endpoints the path component specifies the name of a network
interface. Currently supported parameters are:
.IP method
Optionally specify the method of capture (
.I packet
for a plain AF_PACKET
socket,
.I ringv1
,
.I ringv2
or
.I ringv3
for one with a ring buffer using the corresponding API version, defaulting
to the highest version available).
.IP snaplen
Optionally specify the maximum packet length (in octets) that can be
captured in full. Defaults to 262144.
.IP capacity
Optionally specify the required buffer capacity (in octets).
.IP promiscuous
Optionally specify whether the interface should be placed in promiscuous
mode (
.I true
or
.I false
, defaulting to
.I false).
.PP
For example:
.PP
.RS 4
netif:ens3
.RE
.PP
would refer to the network interface ens3 with default settings, whereas
.PP
.RS 4
netif:ens3?method=packet&promiscuous=true
.RE
.PP
would additionally place the interface in promiscuous mode, and capture
network traffic using a plain AF_PACKET socket (no ring buffer).
.PP
For
.I unix
endpoints the path component specifies the local pathname where the socket
should be placed.
.PP
If there is already a socket at this location, and if it is unresponsive to
connection attempts, then it will be deleted first on the assumption that
it was abandoned from a previous failed session. Other types of filesystem
object will not to be automatically deleted, and will result in an error if
present.
.PP
The only currently supported parameter is:
.IP snaplen
Optionally specify the maximum message length (in octets) that can be
captured in full. Defaults to 262144.
.PP
For
.I horace+file
endpoints the path component specifies the pathname of a base directory
within the local filesystem for the storage of spoolfiles. Immediately
beneath the base directory are subdirectories for each event source, and
below them are the spoolfiles themselves. Currently supported parameters
are:
.IP filesize
Optionally specify the size (in octets) to which spoolfiles are allowed to
grow when they are being written.
.IP nodelete
Optionally specify whether spoolfiles are deleted once they have been read
and acknowledged (true or false, defaulting to true). This should always be
set to true in normal use, however it is sometimes useful to suppress
deletion for testing purposes.
.PP
For
.I horace+tcp
endpoints the host and port components may be used to specify the local or
remote socket address used for inbound or outbound connections
respectively. The host defaults to the wildcard address when accepting
inbound connections, or the loopback address when initiating outbound
connections. The port defaults to 40960 in both cases.
.PP
Currently supported parameters are:
.IP retry
Optionally specify the time (in seconds) to wait before retrying an
outbound connection attempt if a previous attempt failed.
.IP diode
When set to true, select the unidirectional variant of the HORACE protocol
to allow forwarding through a data diode. Note that reliable delivery is
not provided in this mode of operation.
.PP
For example:
.PP
.RS 4
horace+tcp:
.RE
.PP
could be used to make outbound connections to the local machine, or listen
for inbound connections from anywhere, on the default port of 40960.
.PP
.RS 4
horace+tcp://localhost
.RE
.PP
would have the same effect for outbound connections, but would only allow
inbound connections from the local machine.
.PP
.RS 4
horace+tcp://horace.example.com:40961?retry=60
.RE
.PP
could be used to make outbound connections to the host horace.example.com
with a remote port number of 40961, waiting 60 seconds between retries.
It could also be used to listen for connections exclusively from that host
using a local port number of 40961, however the retry parameter would be
superfluous in that case.
.PP
For
.I mongodb
endpoints the syntax is identical to that used by MongoDB itself. Note that
a specific database name should be included. For example:
.PP
.RS 4
mongodb://localhost/holmes
.RE
.PP
would refer to a MongoDB database named 'holmes' hosted on the local
machine.
.PP
For
.I syslog+udp
endpoints the host and port components may be used to specify the local
socket address used for accepting log messages. The host defaults to the
wildcard address. The port defaults to 'syslog', which should normally
resolve to 514.
.PP
There are no currently supported parameters.
.PP
For
.I clock
endpoints the authority and path components are not currently used, and
should be left empty. The only currently supported parameter is:
.IP poll
Optionally specify the maximum number of seconds between clock records.
Defaults to 3600 (one hour).
.PP
Endpoint drivers are implemented using an extensible plug-in system,
therefore it is possible for new schemes to be implemented without
rebuilding other parts of the software.
.SH SEE ALSO
horace-capture(1), horace-forward(1), horace-genkey(1)
.SH BUGS
In development, not yet stable.
.SH AUTHOR
Graham Shaw (gdshaw@riscpkg.org)
